* *Rationale*: The University of the Philippines College Admission Test (UPCAT) Pre-test material, which was developed by the Philippine Science High School Main Campus (PSHS-MC), was purported to predict the performance of students in the UPCAT. The UPCAT Pre-Test Material has been used in the Philippine Science High School Cordillera Administrative Region Campus (PSHS-CARC). However, there is yet no study that supports this claim. Moreover, there is yet no study as to the validity and reliability of the test, as well as to the effectiveness of each item in the test to discriminate among high and low performing students. 
* *Objectives*: To conduct a test item analysis of the UPCAT Pre-Test material using Classical Test Theory (CTT).
* *What was done*: The UPCAT 310-item Pre-Test covering Language (125 items), Geology (35 items), Physics (30 items), Chemistry (30 items),  Biology (30 items), and Mathematics (60 items), was administered to 72 members of Batch 2014. The test ran for a total of 3 hours, compared to the 3 hours and 45 minutes in the actual UPCAT. The students' responses were encoded in a spreadsheet file using LibreOffice Calc.  The data was imported in R to compute Item-total correlation (for index of discrimination), and proportion correct (for index of difficulty) using the CTT package. Moreover, internal consistency was computed using Cronbach's alpha in R. Poor items were identified using a function in R. The function was based on a rule using item-total correlation and proportion correct.  Distractor analysis was then performed using LibreOffice Calc. 
* *Findings*:  The researcher identified 11 items too easy (proportion correct > 0.9), 7 items too hard and 176 items with low item-total correlation. Overall, the rule flagged 187 of 310 items bad. The test has good internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha = 0.81). The internal consistency is improved (Cronbach's alpha = 0.86) by removing the bad items. Using Spearman Brown prophecy formula, and assuming a similar good and bad items, the researcher found out that roughly the same internal consistency (0.8) can be achieved using 0.65 times as many items, an initial pool of around 202 items. The researcher was also able to identify 50 items, including those considered bad, whose at least one distractor can be improved.
* *Implications*: The good internal consistency indicates that several items that propose to measure the same general construct produce similar scores. A follow-up study should be undertaken to determine the test-retest reliability. The result of the Spearman Brown prophecy formula, might be due to several redundant items. A table of specification should be constructed in order to identify all items that measure the same concept, and, consequently, to identify the redundant items. Lastly, after altering all of the bad items and all of the items with faulty distractors, the time allotment should be increased to the actual 3 hours, 45 minutes, instead of trimming down the number of items.
